Permission updates (#685)
CloudCannon/platform-documentation: developer/articles/best-practices-for-custom-permission-groups.mdx

## File globs

A file glob is a pattern used to identify matching files. File globs look similar to a file path with a mix of literal text and special characters such as `*` and `{ }`. In CloudCannon, you can specify read or write access to specific file globs in a Custom Permission Group for fine-grain control over reading and editing site files.

<comp.Notice info_type="info">
  If you need assistance setting-up file globs in your Organization, our <a href="https://cloudcannon.com/support/" target="_blank" rel="noopener">support team</a> is always happy to help.
</comp.Notice>

Here are some common pitfalls when creating file globs.

> ### Adding a permission file glob narrows access to matching files

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Adding a *Permission* file glob narrows access to matching files
```

> Adding a file glob to a *permission* narrows that permission to a whitelist of matching files. This is because adding globs enables the *site:file* resource at a more specific level.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Adding a file glob to a *Permission* narrows it to files that match the glob pattern(s), excluding all others. Because of this, you can unintentionally remove access to files when you begin adding file globs to a *Permission*.
```

> By selecting `site:file:read` or `site:file:write` in the resource tree with no file glob, you allow Group members to read or write all files within your permission scope. However, as soon as you add a permission file glob, CloudCannon limits that permission to only the files matching one of its globs. (A file glob in an *exception* behaves differently — it removes only the matching files and leaves the rest of the permission in place.)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By selecting `site:file:read` or `site:file:write` in the resource tree and specifying no file globs, you allow the members of a *Permission Group* to read or write all files within your permission scope. However, as soon as you add one file glob to the *Permission* (or *Exception*), CloudCannon will change which files they can access. For *Permissions*, CloudCannon will limit members of a *Permission Group* to only files that match the glob pattern(s). For *Exceptions*, CloudCannon allows members of a *Permission Group* to access all files except those that match the specified glob pattern(s). When used together, *Permission* file globs provide access to specific files, to the exclusion of all others, and *Exception* file globs limit access within the files that match the *Permission* pattern.
```

> You may unintentionally lose access to files by adding a permission file glob.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> For example, suppose we add the file glob `posts/**` with write access to a Custom Permission Group, and add no other file globs. Members of this Group will be able to see and edit any files within the collection “Posts” (as permission to write implicitly includes permission to read). Because this permission now covers only files matching `posts/**`, members of this Group will lose access to all files that do not match. Without permission to read other files, all other collections on your Site will not appear in the app.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's walk through an example.

You have a *Custom Permission Group* with the *Permission* `site:file:write`. This allows members of that *Group* to read and write any file on the *Site* (as permission to write implicitly includes permission to read). By adding the `content/**/*` file glob to your *Permission*, members of the *Group* will lose read and write access to any file that is not in the `content` collection. Without permission to read other files, all other collections on your *Site* will not appear in CloudCannon.
```

* The Schemas folder or specific Schema for any files you want Group members to be able to edit or create.
* Any folders in your repository for storing or uploading images and videos.

### Exceptions carve out files without needing a matching permission glob

An exception file glob removes only the files it matches — it does not switch the permission into whitelist mode. So if you select `site:file:read` or `site:file:write` in the permission resource tree (a permission with no file glob, covering every file) and add an exception file glob, members keep access to every file *except* those the exception matches.

For example, a permission with `site:file:write` selected plus an exception for the file glob `secrets/**` lets members edit every file except those under `secrets`.

You do not need to add a `**/*` permission glob for the exception to work — a globless `site:file:read` or `site:file:write` permission already covers all files, and the exception carves out from it. Remember that a read-level exception glob also removes write access to the matching files, while a write-level exception glob leaves read access in place.

### Specifying files but not subfolders

> File globs include special characters such as `*` and `{ }`. The `*` character matches any file within a single folder — it does not cross folder boundaries — while `/**/` matches any number of folders. When you want to specify any file, it is important to account for any subfolders within your collection.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
File globs include special characters such as `*` and `{ }`. The `*` character matches any file within a single folder. without crossing folder boundaries, while `/**/` matches any number of folders. When specifying a file, it is important to account for any subfolders in your *Collection*.
```

> For example, the file glob `/posts/*` will match any file located immediately within the “Posts” collection. The glob `/posts/*/*` will match any file located exactly one subfolder deep in your collection.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, the file glob `/posts/*` will match any file located immediately within the root of the “Posts” *Collection*, `/posts/*/*` will match any file located exactly one subfolder deep, and `/posts/**/*` will match any number of subfolders deep in your *Collection*. A glob ending in `/**`, such as `/posts/**`, is equivalent to `/posts/**/*`.
```

> To account for files within any number of subfolders, we recommend using a file glob that contains `/**/*`. In the above example, this would be `/posts/**/*`, which matches any file immediately within the “Posts” collection or within any number of subfolders under “Posts.” A glob ending in `/**`, such as `/posts/**`, is equivalent to `/posts/**/*`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> ### Adding file globs but forgetting the read permission for your CloudCannon configuration file

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Adding file globs but forgetting the read permission for your CloudCannon Configuration File
```

> You need permission to read the [CloudCannon configuration file](/documentation/developer-articles/what-is-the-cloudcannon-configuration-file/)  to see the Collections in your *Site Navigation*. As soon as you add a permission file glob, CloudCannon narrows the generic `site:file:read` or `site:file:write` options to only files that match one of your permission globs. If your globs do not cover the CloudCannon configuration file, members of your Custom Permission Groups will be limited in their ability to use Sites on CloudCannon.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You need permission to read the [CloudCannon Configuration File](/documentation/developer-articles/what-is-the-cloudcannon-configuration-file/)  to see *Collections* in your *Site Navigation*. As soon as you add a *Permission* file glob, CloudCannon narrows the generic `site:file:read` or `site:file:write` options to only files that match one of your *Permission* globs. If your globs do not cover the CloudCannon Configuration File, members of your *Custom Permission Groups* will be limited in their ability to use *Sites* on CloudCannon.
```
